---
toc: true
layout: post
categories: [python]
title: "Python Control Flow: EAFP Vs LBYL"
---

EAFP - Easier to Ask for Forgiveness than Permission
LBYL - Look Before You Leap

These are two different ways to do control flow. LBYL style pertains to writing `if/else` blocks to make decisions. According to [1], in this not so standard Pythonic way of doing control flow, exceptional cases get the emphasis by the way the conditions are expressed. A common example as below:
```
if "key" in dict_:
  value += dict_["key"]
```
As [1] suggests, in simpler words, the above piece of code conveys the special case in an emphasized way rather than showing us what is normal. Using `try/except` blocks(EAFP), we write what is normal and handle exceptions that may rise out of it. This becomes easier to convey the more natural cases as follows:
```
try:
    value += dict_["key"]
except KeyError:
    pass
```
[2] adds another important case where EAFP helps to avoid race conditions. In a multi-threaded environment, in the above `if/else` block, assume a thread has passed the `if` condition. Before the next statement gets executed in the current thread, another thread may inadvertently remove the `key` from `dict_` which would cause an exception in the original thread. However, in the `try/except` case, this cannot happen. Another way to solve this problem is to use standard locking mechanisms.

[1] - [Idiomatic Python: EAFP versus LBYL](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/python/idiomatic-python-eafp-versus-lbyl/)

[2] - [Chapter 15. Context Managers and else Blocks, Fluent Python, Luciano Ramalho](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/fluent-python/9781491946237/ch15.html)
